---
title: Assessments
layout: article
---

*This is a v2 science API. These APIs are not yet complete or ready for production.*

<div id="toc"></div>

## Introduction 

Any activity a user performs in your app that collects data for scientific research is called an *assessment* in Bridge. 

Answering a survey, filling out a medication tracker, or doing a test with device sensors are all assessments of your participant. Assessments with good scientific validity are a team effort involving scientists and software engineers. Bridge provides features to share validated assessments between apps, and within the studies that are conducted in an app. These assessments can then be scheduled for participants who have been allocated to one or more arms of your study. The system allows for controlled customization of these assessments as a software component in your app.

The [Assessments API](/swagger-ui/index.html#/Assessments) has two main components. First, an [Assessment](/model-browser.html#Assessment) and its associated [ExternalResource](/model-browser.html#ExternalResource) links provide documentation for the assessment (both technical and scientific). We expect most documentation will live outside of our shared assessment tools, hosted in places like Sage Bionetworks’ [Synapse wikis](https://docs.synapse.org/articles/wikis.html) or on [Github](https://github.com/). Second, each assessment has an associated [configuration] that Bridge’s client app SDK uses to present the user interface in an app. 

Assessments are conceptually organized into an ordered set of revisions that share a common `identifier`. The higher the `revision` number, the more recently that revision should have been created (although this isn’t strictly enforced; the `createdOn` timestamp can be used to determine the actual temporal order of revisions). Each assessment revision can *also* be retrieved by a unique GUID, which is easier to work with than an `identifier` and `revision` value. Revisions logically replace one another and form a history of changes to an assessment.

Bridge has a shared assessment library of validated, high-quality assessments that researchers can include in their apps. Once copied for use in an app, they can be scheduled as part of a study design. The assessment also indicates specific fields that can be customized for your app, without undermining the scientific validity of the assessment. 

## Using assessments

Curated assessments are available through our [Shared Assessments APIs](/swagger-ui/index.html#/Shared%20Assessments). In addition to some basic information about the assessment, there will be a set of [ExternalResource](/model-browser.html#ExternalResource) objects that provide links to many kinds of documentation. Those links will be assigned to one of the following categories:

|Category|Purpose of Documentation|
|--------|-----------|
|customization_options|Describes the fields that can be edited, through a special API for this purpose, to customize an assessment in a specific app. These fields are chosen by the assessment authors because they are not believed to effect the validity of the data collected by the assessment.|
|data_repository|Describes an online location where data can be found that has been generated by this assessment, in one or more studies.|
|science_documentation|Documentation of the scientific interpretation of the data collected by the assessment. Schema information, like data dictionaries, falls into this category.|
|developer_documentation|Documentation on the software and the assessment configuration that is specifically for implementing an assessment in app development (information about the interpretation of the data that is generated should be marked as "science_documentation."|
|license|The software or other licenses for this assessment.|
|publication|A publication that was based at least in part on data collected through this assessment.|
|release_note|Documentation of changes in a specific revision of an assessment (we suggest that the `minRevision` and `maxRevision` values on this `ExternalResource` should both be set to the revision being documented).|
|sample_app|A sample app showing the implementation of the assessment in working software. Intended for developers who are implementing a new app.|
|sample_data|Sample data for researchers  that is identical to the data generated by the assessment.|
|screenshot|An image file (`format` field should be an image MIME type) showing an example of the assessment’s UI within Bridge’s app SDKs.|
|see_also|Link to a related assessment, measure, or methodology (it does not need to be in the Bridge system).|
|used\_in\_study|A link to a study that has utilized this assessment (this is a link to some public face for the study, not data or publications from that study).|
|website|Any other website.|
|other|Any other kind of resource that might not be linkable (if you  can link to it, it may be better to categorize it as a website).|

To use a shared assessment, it must be [imported into your app](/swagger-ui/index.html#/Shared%20Assessments/importSharedAssessment). You must be signed in to the app context on Bridge, and you must include the ID of the organization that will own the local copy of the shared assessment (in most cases, there is only one choice here: your own organization). Everyone working on an app (in all organizations) will be able to see and schedule this assessment, but only members of the owning organization will be able to edit or customize the assessment.

[TODO: customization]

## Developing assessments

### Assessment metadata

Assessments will begin their development lifecycle in a specific app context. At first, they are likely to be thin on documentation as developers work out the appropriate configuration to drive the right UI and collect the right data. 

Once the assessment has been tested and validated, and appropriate documentation has been prepared, it can be [published to the shared assessment library](/swagger-ui/index.html#/Assessments/publishAssessment). The assessment, all its resources, and its configuration will be copied to the shared library. 

If the assessment has never been published to the library before (its identifier is unique), it will be published at revision 1.

Otherwise it will be published at the highest existing revision number + 1. *All the existing ExternalResource records in the shared library for this assessment stream will be deleted and replaced with the ExternalResource records in the local study.*

The *local* assessment will be updated to reflect that it is now a logical “copy” of the new shared assessment (its `originGuid` will be set to the GUID of the new shared assessment revision, and all its configuration nodes will be marked as “locked”).

After publication, if any part of the local assessment is updated (metadata *or* configuration), it will lose its link to the shared assessment. If another assessment links to nodes in this assessment’s configuration tree, an update of *that* assessment will copy the shared nodes on write so the linked assessment remains unchanged. Like any other copy of a shared component, however, the local assessment *can* be customized through the customization API.

In the shared assessment library, members of the owning organization will be able to edit the metadata of the shared assessment (the assessment and resources), *but not the shared configuration.* To change the configuration, you will need to publish a new revision of your assessment (which should be treated like any other software release).

<div class="ui icon message">
  <i class="circle info icon"></i>
  <p style="margin:0"><b>Why are assessment configurations “locked”?</b> The configurations define the code that collects and formats the data produced by the assessment. Changing the configuration could inadvertently change the structure, formatting, or semantic meaning of the data produced. This could invalidate the assessment’s scientific utility.</p>
</div>

### Assessment configuration

[now talk about the configuration]

### Configuration customization

The `customizationFields` of the [Assessment](/model-browser.html#Assessment) model specifies the specific nodes and fields of an `AssessmentNode` that can be changed without invalidating the assessment (changes are made to a copy of a shared assessment in an app context). The field looks like this:

```json
{
  "Bnm_u6qFhrdmvW82nx2nFRyi": [
    "label", "prompt"
  ],
  "L4gdW7rIttLVuurmBg5P9k5x": [
    "metadata:back_button_label", "metadata:forward_button_label"
  ]
}
```

These customization options allow the local copy of the assessment to be changed through the configuration API in specific ways: the node with GUID "Bnm\_u6qFhrdmvW82nx2nFRyi" allows the `label` and `prompt` fields to be updated; and the node with the GUID "L4gdW7rIttLVuurmBg5P9k5x" allows two keys in its `metadata` map to be updated: `back_button_label` and `forward_button_label`.